add cpp sol + editorial to drought (gold) (#2945)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/usaco-1185.mdx

---
id: usaco-1185
source: USACO Gold 2022 January
title: Drought
author: Ryan Chou
---

[Official Analysis (C++)](http://usaco.org/current/data/sol_prob1_gold_jan22.html)

## Explanation

> First, let's split the problem into two cases, if $N$ is even or if $N$ is odd.

Reviewer: why? what in the problem would make you think that even & odd cases would be any different?

Author: ~~the bounds~~

If $N$ is even, then we can assume that from any arrangement where all the hunger values are equal, we can reduce them all to zero by decreasing adjacent cows together.

> However, if $N$ is odd, we can't make the same assumption. Thus, we have to count the number of arrangements for all possible hunger levels $x$. To account for this, note that by shifting the ceiling of the data by $x$, we can find the answer for setting all cows to $x$ with the same process as earlier.

Reviewer: > Thus, we have to count the number of arrangements for all possible hunger levels $x$.

?

Let's calculate the time complexity!

We'll have $N \cdot \max H$ number of states, and each transition can take up to $\max H$ operations, so our time complexity would be $\mathcal{O}(N(\max H)^2)$. Unfortunately, in odd cases, we'll have to try all possible $x < \min H$, which'll give us a resulting time complexity of $\mathcal{O}(N(\max H)^3)$ (since all the elements can be the same).

Luckily, because our transition updates a contiguous range of states, we can process our transition in $\mathcal{O}(1)$ with a difference array.

This speeds up our algorithm to $\mathcal{O}(N(\max H)^2)$!
## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N(\max H)^2)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

using ll = long long;

const int MOD = 1e9 + 7;
const int MX_HUNGER = 1000;

vector<int> h;
vector<ll> dp(MX_HUNGER + 1), diff(MX_HUNGER + 2);

int n;

ll ways_offset(int shift) {
	// initially one way to set the first i elements to zero
	for (int i = 0; i <= MX_HUNGER; i++) {
		dp[i] = 1;
	}

	// ways considering that all numbers before i are all zero & i is set to j
	for (int i = 1; i < n; i++) {

> 		for (int j = 0; j <= (h[i - 1] - shift) && (h[i] - shift) - j + 1 >= 0; j++) {

Reviewer: over 80

			/*
			 * we have to add (i, j) to (i + 1, [0, h[i] - j]),
			 * use difference array to quickly update range
			 */

			int rb = (h[i] - shift) - j + 1;

			diff[0] += dp[j];

			if (diff[0] >= MOD) {
				diff[0] -= MOD;
			}

			// be careful when modding negative values
			diff[rb] = (((diff[rb] - dp[j]) % MOD) + MOD) % MOD;
		}

		dp[0] = diff[0];

		for (int j = 1; j <= MX_HUNGER; j++) {
			dp[j] = dp[j - 1] + diff[j];

			if (dp[j] >= MOD) {
				dp[j] -= MOD;
			}
			
			assert(dp[j] >= 0);
		}

		// reset difference array
		for (int j = 0; j <= MX_HUNGER; j++) {
			diff[j] = 0;
		}
	}

	return dp[0];
}

int main() {

> 	cin.tie(0)->sync_with_stdio(0);

Reviewer: needed?

	cin >> n;

> 	h.reserve(n);

Reviewer: ew globals

Reviewer: i'd love that

---
id: usaco-1185
source: USACO Gold 2022 January
title: Drought
author: Ryan Chou
---

[Official Analysis (C++)](http://usaco.org/current/data/sol_prob1_gold_jan22.html)

## Explanation

Let's consider a case where we have just two cows.

$[2, 2]$

In any case where they're equal, it's always possible to reduce them both to zero! (by decreasing adjacent elements).

However, with three cows:

$[2, 2, 2]$

> We can't apply the same transformation. In fact, for any odd number of cows, it's impossible to guarantee that we can decrement all the elements to zero.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can't apply the same transformation. In fact, for any odd number of cows, it's impossible to guarantee that we can decrement all the elements to zero even if all the elements are equal.
```
or some other modifier? since "it's impossible to guarantee that we can decrement all the elements to zero" is still true for even numbers

Author: intended to say that we can't assure for input where there are an odd number of cows -- does it not come across as that?

Reviewer 2: hmm i mean that i feel like "In fact, for any odd number of cows, it's impossible to guarantee that we can decrement all the elements to zero." implies that it's not possible to guarantee only for odd numbers of cows implying that it's possible to guarantee for even numbers of cows?

Author: but it is?

Reviewer 2: umm isn't it only possible to guarantee that for an even number of cows, the elements can all be made zero if all the elements are the same? not with just any assortment of elements

Author: omg i misread, sorry!

yep you're right

> This motivates us to split the problem into two cases, if $N$ is even or if $N$ is odd.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This motivates us to split the problem into two cases: even $N$ and odd $N$.
```
(optional)

If $N$ is even, then we can count the number of tuples such that all the elements are at zero because we can guarantee that this tuple can reach all equal states and vice versa.

However, if $N$ is odd, we can't make the same assumption, they could be equal at any value! Thus, we have to count the number of tuples for all possible hunger levels $x$. To account for this, note that by shifting the ceiling of the data by $x$, we can find the answer for setting all cows to $x$ with the same process as earlier.

> What information do we have to keep track of at point $i$?

Reviewer 2: hmm i think just mentioning point i before the dp is a bit weird since it's unclear what "point i" is

Author: makes sense, thanks!

While it may seem that the index is all we need, since we can only decrease the right-most cow with the one to the left of it, we also have to keep track of the current cow's hunger value such that we don't make it impossible to get the right-most cow to zero.

More formally, if we let $\texttt{dp}[i][j] =$ the number of tuples that can be formed if the first $i - 1$ elements are set to zero and the $i$th element is hunger value $j$, then this state affects all states $\texttt{dp}[i + 1][j]$ such that $h_i \leq k \leq h_{i + 1}$.

Let's calculate the time complexity!

We'll have $N \cdot \max H$ number of states, and each transition can take up to $\max H$ operations, so our time complexity would be $\mathcal{O}(N(\max H)^2)$. Unfortunately, in odd cases, we'll have to try all possible $x < \min H$, which'll give us a resulting time complexity of $\mathcal{O}(N(\max H)^3)$ (since all the elements can be the same).

> Luckily, because our transition updates a contiguous range of states, we can process our transition in $\mathcal{O}(1)$ with a difference array.

Reviewer: what does this mean

This speeds up our algorithm to $\mathcal{O}(N(\max H)^2)$!
## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N(\max H)^2)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

using ll = long long;

const int MOD = 1e9 + 7;
const int MX_HUNGER = 1000;

vector<int> h;

> vector<ll> dp(MX_HUNGER + 1), diff(MX_HUNGER + 2);

Reviewer: sep lines

	// initially one way to set the first i elements to zero
	for (int i = 0; i <= MX_HUNGER; i++) {
		dp[i] = 1;
	}

	// ways considering that all numbers before i are all zero & i is set to j
	for (int i = 1; i < n; i++) {
		int j = 0;
		while (j <= (h[i - 1] - shift) && (h[i] - shift) - j + 1 >= 0) {
			/*
			 * we have to add (i, j) to (i + 1, [0, h[i] - j]),
			 * use difference array to quickly update range
			 */

			int rb = (h[i] - shift) - j + 1;

			diff[0] += dp[j];

			if (diff[0] >= MOD) {
				diff[0] -= MOD;
			}

			// be careful when modding negative values
			diff[rb] = (((diff[rb] - dp[j]) % MOD) + MOD) % MOD;
			j++;
		}

		dp[0] = diff[0];

		for (int j = 1; j <= MX_HUNGER; j++) {
			dp[j] = dp[j - 1] + diff[j];

			if (dp[j] >= MOD) {
				dp[j] -= MOD;
			}
			
			assert(dp[j] >= 0);
		}

		// reset difference array
		for (int j = 0; j <= MX_HUNGER; j++) {
			diff[j] = 0;
		}
	}

	return dp[0];
}

int main() {
	cin >> n;
	h.reserve(n);

	int mn = MX_HUNGER;
	for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
		cin >> h[i];
		mn = min(mn, h[i]);
	}

	ll ans = 0;
	vector<int> h;
	vector<ll> dp(MX_HUNGER + 1);
	vector<ll> diff(MX_HUNGER + 2);

> 	if (n % 2) {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	if (n % 2 == 1) {
```
j looks better yo

We'll have $N \cdot \max H$ number of states, and each transition can take up to $\max H$ operations, so our time complexity would be $\mathcal{O}(N(\max H)^2)$. Unfortunately, in odd cases, we'll have to try all possible $x < \min H$, which'll give us a resulting time complexity of $\mathcal{O}(N(\max H)^3)$ (since all the elements can be the same).

Luckily, because our transition updates a contiguous range of states, we can process our transition in $\mathcal{O}(1)$ with a difference array.

This speeds up our algorithm to $\mathcal{O}(N(\max H)^2)$!
## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N(\max H)^2)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

using ll = long long;

const int MOD = 1e9 + 7;
const int MX_HUNGER = 1000;

vector<int> h;
vector<ll> dp(MX_HUNGER + 1), diff(MX_HUNGER + 2);

int n;

ll ways_offset(int shift) {
	// initially one way to set the first i elements to zero
	for (int i = 0; i <= MX_HUNGER; i++) {
		dp[i] = 1;
	}

	// ways considering that all numbers before i are all zero & i is set to j
	for (int i = 1; i < n; i++) {
		for (int j = 0;
			j <= (h[i - 1] - shift) &&
			(h[i] - shift) - j + 1 >= 0;

> 		 j++) {

Reviewer: if your for loop is this long just use a `while`

While it may seem that the index is all we need, since we can only decrease the right-most cow with the one to the left of it, we also have to keep track of the current cow's hunger value such that we don't make it impossible to get the right-most cow to zero.

More formally, if we let $\texttt{dp}[i][j] =$ the number of tuples that can be formed if the first $i - 1$ elements are set to zero and the $i$th element is hunger value $j$, then this state affects all states $\texttt{dp}[i + 1][k - h_i]$ such that $h_i \leq k \leq h_{i + 1}$.

Let's calculate the time complexity!

We'll have $N \cdot \max H$ number of states, and each transition can take up to $\max H$ operations, so our time complexity would be $\mathcal{O}(N(\max H)^2)$. Unfortunately, in odd cases, we'll have to try all possible $x < \min H$, which'll give us a resulting time complexity of $\mathcal{O}(N(\max H)^3)$ (since all the elements can be the same).

> Luckily, because our transition updates a contiguous range of states ($[0, h_i]$), we can process our transition in $\mathcal{O}(1)$ with a difference array.

Reviewer: i still don't really get it
perhaps give an example?
